Lesson

Identifying Strengths
and Weaknesses

2

A G E N D A
n

Starter

n

People Bingo

n

Some of Both

n

Make Them Work for You

n

Conclusion

n

Questions for Assessment

Objectives
Students will recognize that each individual has personal strengths.
Students will identify their individual strengths and weaknesses.
Students will identify ways in which they can use their weaknesses to their
advantage.

Materials Needed
•

Two copies of the “Bingo” activity sheet (#2) for each student (Parts I and II)

41
www.overcomingobstacles.org

x42

C onfidence B uilding

Starter (3 minutes )
Ask for a volunteer to play a quick game of catch. Tell the volunteer that he or she
may use only one hand to catch. Gently toss a piece of chalk to the student. Then,
ask him or her the following questions:
•

Which hand did you use to catch the chalk?

•

Why did you use this hand rather than the other one? (If the student replies
that he or she is right- or left-handed, ask what this means.)

•

If one of your hands is dominant, or stronger, does this mean that your other
hand is useless or worthless? Why or why not?

Remind students that everyone has strengths. Point out that everyone also has
some weaknesses; however, just like the less dominant hand, weaknesses do not
need to be obstacles. Tell students that they will identify their individual strengths
and will explore the relationship between strengths and weaknesses.

Part I People Bingo (15 minutes )
Purpose: Students recognize their individual strengths by playing a game involving
group interaction.
1. Students listen to the game’s directions.
Distribute copies of the “Bingo” activity sheet (#2), and allow time for students to review it. Then, give the following directions:
• Move around the room, and ask your classmates to sign their names in a
square that describes one of their strengths. For example, if a square reads
“knows how to swim,” find a classmate who knows how to swim and ask
him or her to sign that square.
• Your goal is to get bingo. That means that you must fill five squares in a
row with names. Completed rows may read across, down, or diagonally.
• A person’s name cannot be in any winning row more than once.
• When you have filled a row with signatures, call out, “Bingo!”
• If you sign your name to something, you may be asked to prove it.
• You have five minutes to play.
2. Students play the game.
Tell students to begin, allowing them to move freely around the room.
After five minutes, quickly poll the class to see how many students are just
one square away from bingo. Decide whether to allow an additional minute or
two before ending the game.

www.overcomingobstacles.org

L esson 2  I dentifying  S trengths and W eaknesses

43x

3. Students discuss the activity.
Ask students if they found it difficult to get signatures for the various squares.
As volunteers respond, encourage them to support their responses with details
and examples. Allow students to challenge one another. For example, if a
student has signed his or her name to the square that reads “speaks more
than one language,” the student may be asked to say a few words in another
tongue. This often allows students a chance to show off their strengths, and
further encourages the class to build trust and a positive rapport.
Summarize the discussion by observing that the activity sheet has 24 different
squares on it, each listing a different skill or strength. Point out that everyone
has strengths, which is why each student was able to sign his or her name to at
least one square.
In the event a student claims that he or she felt unable to sign any square on
the sheet, remind the class that it’s impossible to measure all of the skills and
strengths that people have—the sheet listed only 24, which is a small number.
If pressed, tell the student that he or she kept the commitment to be in class
today, and that keeping commitments is a very valuable strength.

Part II Some of Both (10 minutes )
Purpose: Students will identify their individual strengths and weaknesses.
1. Students identify their personal strengths.
Distribute new copies of the “Bingo” activity sheet. Ask students to reread
each square and to consider whether it lists one of their strengths or traits.
If so, have them write their name in the square. If not, ask them to put an X
across the square.
Point out that students have begun to identify personal strengths. Allow time
for students to add additional squares across the bottom of the chart, indicating other strengths or skills they have.
2. Students identify their personal weaknesses.
Explain that even the most talented, respected people have weaknesses or
areas in which they don’t excel. Share a weakness of your own with the class;
perhaps you are not a great speller, you can’t carry a tune, or you have trouble
memorizing things. Write your example on the board.
Invite volunteers to provide examples of their personal weaknesses. Record
their responses on the board. If students have difficulty offering examples,
refer them to the boxes they left blank on the second “Bingo” activity sheet.
The recorded list of weaknesses needs to include only a few examples.
Tell students to use the backs of their activity sheets to list some of their
weaknesses.

www.overcomingobstacles.org

x44

C onfidence B uilding

Part III Make Them Work for You (5 minutes )
Purpose: Students identify ways to use weaknesses to their advantage.
1. Students explore how to turn weaknesses into strengths.
Refer to the list on the board, and challenge students to convert these weaknesses into strengths. Model the thinking process for them by addressing your
own example first. For example, you might say, “I’m a poor speller, so I have
to proofread carefully. But when I proofread, I usually catch other mistakes,
too. This makes my writing stronger than it might be if I were a good speller.”
Ensure that students understand the technique of changing their attitudes in
order to convert a weakness into a strength. Explain that this technique will
be useful throughout their lives. Provide examples of situations in which converting a weakness into a strength is especially useful (e.g., when being teased,
during an interview).
2. Students continue brainstorming in small groups.
Encourage students to brainstorm ways that one of the weaknesses listed on
the board can be restated as a strength. If students cannot reasonably convert
a weakness, focus the discussion on identifying ways to overcome it.
When the brainstorming session is complete, divide the class into groups
of four or five. Explain that within each group, students should brainstorm
ways to convert the weaknesses each student has listed on the back of his
or her activity sheet. Remind students that if they cannot find ways to convert a weakness into a strength, they should brainstorm ways to overcome it.
Suggest that each group appoint a volunteer to take notes on the strategies
created to address their individual weaknesses.
3. Students share their strategies.
Invite a volunteer from each group to share some strategies that the group
developed. Be sure to affirm students’ efforts and to encourage supporting
ideas from other students.
Conclude the discussion by pointing out that knowing what you’re not good
at is actually a real strength. Successful people focus on doing what they’re best
at, and make sure to work with others who are strong in the areas in which
they are weak. That way, everyone is doing what he or she is best at.
Give examples of this strategy, such as the following:
• Actors often work with business advisors who are paid to manage their
finances efficiently.
• Athletes work with coaches who are talented at strategizing.
• Doctors specialize in a particular area, and work with other specialists to
treat patients most effectively.

www.overcomingobstacles.org

L esson 2  I dentifying  S trengths and W eaknesses

45x

Conclusion (2 minutes )
Ask students if this process was easy or difficult. Ask them to name a few of their
classmates’ strengths. Elicit from students the following key points that were
taught in this lesson:
•

Everyone has strengths. It’s important to identify your own strengths so that
you can focus on using them.

•

Everyone also has weaknesses. It’s important to identify your weaknesses
so you can create strategies for overcoming them or using them to your
advantage.

•

Successful, respected people can always identify both their strengths and their
weaknesses. It’s what enables them to focus on doing what they do best, and
to work with others who have strengths in areas in which they are weak.

Questions for Assessment
1. Why is it important to be aware of your own strengths?
2. List three of your personal strengths (or three things that you are good at).
3. What are some ways you can turn a weakness into a strength?

www.overcomingobstacles.org

x46

C onfidence B uilding

LESSON EXTENSIONS
Extension: Using Quotations
Quote: “Once we know our weak-

nesses they cease to do us any harm.”
–Georg C. Lichtenberg

Activity: Have students rewrite this

piece of wisdom in their own words, as
if passing it on to a friend or classmate.

Extension: Writing in Your Journal
Activity: Have students write a one-

Extension: Addressing Multiple
Learning Styles

Activity: Have volunteers who excel at

jumping rope prepare and “perform”
the poem “Jumping Double Dutch”
(activity sheet #3) for the class.

Help students use their bingo cards
to divide the class into other groups
of experts. Have each group write and
perform a poem, chant, or cheer to celebrate their areas of expertise.

Extension: Using Technology
Activity: Have students create business

minute sales pitch or want ad (100
words or less) describing their skills,
interests, and experiences. Remind students to use lively, positive language.

cards on a computer, choosing a logo and
slogan that characterizes their strengths.
(Specify in advance if it’s okay for them to
include phone numbers/emails.)

Have students share their first drafts
with a partner for feedback before presenting their pitches/ads to the class.

Have students share their work in small
groups, explaining their choices of
words and designs.

Extension: Homework
Activity: Have students interview an

Extension: Additional Resources
Activity: Have students read Freak the

adult they admire about something he
or she considers a weakness, and how
he or she has compensated for it or
used it as an advantage. Have students
summarize their findings in a paragraph.
Have the class discuss what they’ve
learned. Create a chart of strategies for
compensating for weaknesses.

Mighty by Rodman Philbrick, or watch
the movie based on the novel (The
Mighty).
Discuss the relationship between the
main characters—oversized, learningdisabled Max and physically disabled,
genius Kevin. Have students list the
strengths of each young man, and
describe how they helped each other
compensate for their respective weaknesses.

www.overcomingobstacles.org

77

C onfidence B uilding | L esson 2 | A ctivity  S heet #2

Bingo
Likes to
join in
activities

Speaks more Tells great
stories and
than one
jokes
language

Is a good
speller

Plays a team
Likes to read
sport

Can play
Knows how
a musical
to swim
instrument

v

Has a good
memory

Is good at
building
or making
things

Likes to
Likes to
figure out
make charts
how things
and graphs
work

Likes to
write

Likes to be Likes to help
in plays
others

Is a good
cook

© 2018 Overcoming Obstacles

Can
organize
anything

Always
works hard

Is good at
math

Likes to
Keeps a perdesign postsonal diary
ers and
or journal
murals

Is a good
artist

Confidence Building Middle School

Can use a
computer

Is a great
dancer

