See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228505779

Matching and Stretching Learners‟ Learning Styles
Article in Journal of Language Teaching and Research · April 2011
DOI: 10.4304/jltr.2.2.285-294

CITATIONS

READS

44

4,474

1 author:
Luu Trong Tuan
Swinburne University of Technology
146 PUBLICATIONS 5,456 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Luu Trong Tuan on 22 July 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

ISSN 1798-4769
Journal of Language Teaching and Research, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 285-294, March 2011
© 2011 ACADEMY PUBLISHER Manufactured in Finland.
doi:10.4304/jltr.2.2.285-294

Matching and Stretching Learners‟ Learning
Styles
Luu Trong Tuan
National University of Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
Email: luutrongtuan@vnn.vn
Abstract—Creating and sustaining learners’ active involvement in learning requires an understanding of their
learning style preferences. Through a questionnaire survey and participant observations, this study sought to
explore the extent to which teachers understand their students’ language learning styles as well as teacherstudent style mismatches in Vietnamese EFL classrooms, which have brought about students’ dissatisfaction
and low performance. The study found Vietnamese EFL learners more intuitive than sensing, more visual
than verbal, more active than reflective, and more sequential than global. After matching the distribution of
learning styles, this action research applied the multi-style teaching strategies suggested by Kolb (1984) and
Felder (1993) to stretch students’ learning style patterns. While guiding students into certain learning styles,
teachers had to guid themselves into the teaching styles they are not accustomed to. The benefits of style
matching and stretching were confirmed beside the failures in the class where adult learners failed to respond
to style stretching strategies and in the class where the teacher failed to respond to students’ learning styles.
These failures remind teachers that other learner factors, teacher factors, and learning environment factors
always exist beside learning and teaching styles as promoters or hinderers to style matching and stretching
strategies.
Index Terms—learning style, teaching style, style matching strategies, style stretching strategies

I. INTRODUCTION
Vietnam‟s open-door policy since 1989 has exposed Vietnamese EFL (English as a Foreign Language) teachers in
Vietnam to the current English language teaching trends. Teachers excitedly brought back from seminars and
workshops communicative, learner-centered teaching methods to apply in their classrooms, but soon they received
resistance from their students. Nonetheless, students‟ resistance was passively demonstrated by increased dropout rates.
The passive resistance can be explicated by the fact that Confucianism‟s influence remains to discourage students from
challenging their authorities or seniors (O‟Sullivan, 1997, p. 51). But how did teachers of new teaching methods
interpret their students‟ resistance? One of the interpretations most teachers share was that students felt too secure in
old-fashioned grammar-translation methods to risk changes. Certain teachers alleged that students were looking for
something rather than knowledge of English in EFL classrooms. Some of these teachers also felt more secure by
returning to a lecturer-fronted approach. A few years later, it was found that students‟ passive resistance became voiced.
Schools started to receive complaints from students against teachers of both traditional and modern methods. Schools‟
common action is to ask „problem teachers‟ to adjust their methods. Teachers reluctantly resorted to a communicative,
learner-centered approach again for help. However, did teachers correctly understand the communicative, learnercentered approach, which takes into account learners‟ needs, goals, interests, learning styles and strategies? Renandya,
Lim, Leong, and Jacobs (2001), as lecturers at SEAMEO Regional Language Centre (SEAMEO RELC) and in their
other teaching experiences, have worked with language teachers from around Southeast and Northeast Asia and found
their understandings of communicative approaches differ widely (Renandya et al., 2001). Long and Sato (1983)
reported the same phenomenon in a study with ESL (English as a Second Language) teachers in the U.S., and this
finding was confirmed by Rollman (1994) who did a study with foreign language teachers of German in Canada. Even
though most Vietnamese EFL teachers understand the approach correctly, a number of them „ignore‟ the learner
element of the approach.
The word „ignore‟ is highlighted since numerous teachers understand the position of the learner element in their
teaching strategies. Nevertheless, they do not want to explore it due to such factors as time constraints, energy
insufficiency (due to teaching several hours a day), brief and unrepeated teaching of a particular class, and pride in their
degrees or ranks. It is their „pride‟ that a number of teachers even take students‟ resistance as an offence, but teaching
students without understanding them is a greater offence like doctors treating patients without investigating their
medical histories.
Certain teachers contend that complaints usually hail from students of a low language proficiency level, who prefer
easy-to-understand grammar-translation methods in the classroom. Tobias (1990) gives learners an understanding look:
“They‟re not dumb, they‟re different”. Irvine and York (1995) echo that sentiment: “[A]ll students are capable of
learning, provided the learning environment attends to a variety of learning styles” (p. 494). According to Keefe (1987),

© 2011 ACADEMY PUBLISHER

286

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE TEACHING AND RESEARCH

educators must learn to base programs on the differences that exist among students rather than on the assumption that
everyone learns the same way. Numerous teachers think of students as a featureless mass, but it is growing belief that
the teacher, in making decisions regarding the type of activities to conduct in a language classroom, should take into
account such learner diversities. In this respect, Corder (1977) writes:
In the end successful language "teaching-learning" is going to be dependent upon the willing co-operation of the
participants in the interaction and an agreement between them as to the goals of their interaction. Co-operation cannot
be imposed but must be negotiated (p. 13).
If we truly believe that considering subjective preferences felt by the learner is crucial for effective language learning,
then some kind of negotiation is needed between the participants, in our case, teachers and students. Information has to
be exchanged about roles and expectations, both teachers' and learners' awareness of each other's needs and resources
has to be raised and compromises have to be reached between what learners expect and want and what the teacher feels
he/she can and ought to provide (Brindley, 1989, p. 73). Even when compromise can not be reached, we must teach
students the way they learn (Dunn and Dunn, 1978).
Teachers „ignore‟ learners‟ „ways‟ (merely 33.9% of EFL teachers in Asia were keen on finding out students‟
learning styles according to Renandya, Lim, Leong, and Jacobs, 2001), and so do their schools. By using placement
tests to look into students‟ language proficiency level, schools just do the academic part, not the sociological part of
their job. Information about learning styles can help schools become more sensitive to the differences students bring to
the classroom. Language schools in Vietnam have not systematically diagnosed students‟ learning styles to provide
teachers with the class‟s learning style profile before they enter the classroom or even select teachers with the teaching
styles suited for a particular class. Thus, they do not understand their students until problems happen to compel them to
substitute teachers.
Lack of co-operation resulting from lack of understanding learners‟ learning styles makes teaching in the EFL
classrooms in Vietnam a heavy, strenuous job. This study is done on behalf of other EFL teachers in Vietnam who
desire to surmount this professional problem to be lifelong teachers. The study is also intended to benefit my own
interest for professional self-improvement by exploring areas of my academic concern, as Hyman and Rosoff (1987, p.
185) suggest teachers should also become students of teaching.
The study was guided by the three ensuing research questions:
1. How much do teachers understand their students‟ language learning styles?
2. What teaching strategies can be applied to match the distribution of learning styles in EFL classrooms in Vietnam?
3. To what extent do these strategies work in the classrooms?
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
A. Why do we Need to Understand Learners’ Learning Styles?
The education literature suggests that learners who are actively immersed in the learning process will be more likely
to achieve success (Dewar, 1999). Once learners are actively involved in their own learning process they commence to
feel empowered and their personal achievement and self-direction levels rise.
A key to getting and keeping learners actively involved in learning lies in understanding learning style preferences,
which can impact a learner's performance (Dewar, 1999). Gregorc and Ward‟s (1977) research demonstrated this:
The instructional materials and techniques used by teachers have a direct effect on many students . . . If the approach
fits the preferred learning mode, the learner usually reacted favorably. If, on the other hand, the methods were
mismatched, the student “worked hard to learn”, “learned some and missed some material”, or “tuned out.” (p. 5)
A learner‟s style of learning, if accommodated, can result in enhanced attitudes toward learning and an increase in
thinking skills, academic achievement, and creativity (Irvine & York, 1995).
Carbo and Hodges (1988) contend that “matching students‟ learning styles with appropriate instructional strategies
improves their ability to concentrate and learn” (p. 48). If mismatches transpire, learners tend to be bored and
inattentive in class, do poorly on tests, get discouraged about the course, and may conclude that they are no good at the
subject of the course and give up (Felder & Silverman, 1988). Teachers, confronted by low test grades, unresponsive or
hostile classes, poor attendance, and dropouts, may become overly critical of their learners (making things even worse)
or begin to question their own competence as teachers.
Talmadge and Shearer (1969) have determined that learning styles do exist. Their study shows that the characteristics
of the content of a learning experience are a critical factor affecting relationships that exist between learner
characteristics and instructional methods. Reiff (1992) alleges that styles influence how learners learn, how teachers
teach, and how they interact. Each person is born with certain preferences toward particular styles, but these preferences
are influenced by culture, experience, and development. Keefe (1987) asserts that perceptual style is a matter of learner
choice, but that preference develops from infancy almost subconsciously. A teacher alert to these preferences can
arrange for flexibility in the learning environment.
Thus Keefe (1991) portrays learning style as both a learner characteristic and an instructional strategy. As a learner
characteristic, learning style is an indicator of how a learner learns and likes to learn. As an instructional strategy, it
informs the cognition, context and content of learning.
a. What is learning style?
© 2011 ACADEMY PUBLISHER

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE TEACHING AND RESEARCH

287

Learning style is
1. "the complex manner in which, and conditions under which, learners most efficiently and most effectively perceive,
process, store, and recall what they are attempting to learn" (James and Gardner, 1995, p. 20).
2. "an individual‟s characteristic way of processing information, feeling, and behaving in learning situations" (Smith
as cited in Merriam and Caffarella, 1991, p. 176).
b. Dimensions of Learning Styles
According to Felder and Silverman (1988), the learning style dimensions may be defined in terms of the answers to
the following four questions:
1. What type of information does the learner preferentially perceive: sensory–sights, sounds, physical sensations, or
intuitive – memories, ideas, insights?
2. Through which modality is sensory information most effectively perceived: visual – pictures, diagrams, graphs,
demonstrations, or verbal – written and spoken words and formulas?
3. How does the learner prefer to process information: actively–through engagement in physical activity or discussion,
or reflectively – through introspection?
4. How does the learner progress toward understanding: sequentially–in a logical progression of small incremental
steps, or globally–in large jumps, holistically?
Dimensions of learning styles are summarized in Table 1.

Perception
Sensing
prefer facts, data, and
experimentation
Intuitive
prefer principles, concepts,
and theories

TABLE 1.
DIMENSIONS OF LEARNING STYLES
Input
Processing
Visual
Active
prefer pictures, diagrams,
learn best by doing something
charts
physical with the information
Verbal
Reflective
prefer spoken or written
do the processing in their
explanations
heads

Understanding
Sequential
easily make linear connections
between individual steps
Global
must get “big picture” before
individual pieces fall into place

c. Dynamic nature of learning styles: implications for teachers‟ actions
Every language learner has a particular learning style, and even within one learner, style is not a static phenomenon
that operates in a certain direction all the time (Ehrman, 1996). The literature of educational psychology suggests that
learning styles should be viewed as learners‟ actions rather than abilities, therefore even if a teacher can assess a
learner‟ learning style today, next week it might become different (Hyman & Rosoff, 1987, pp. 178-190). Given their
dynamic nature, styles need to be handled in more selected ways so as to help identify merely the variables which best
serve our need to understand the learners‟ participation problems and resolve them. For this purpose, one way of
describing learning styles, which the literature sometimes uses, is to view them as learners‟ preferences or „comfort
zones‟, implying the educational conditions under which learners learn best (Gibson & Chandler, 1988, p. 258).
Information about learning style can serve as a guide in designing teaching strategies that match or mismatch
learners' styles, depending on the teacher's purpose. Matching is particularly appropriate in working with poorly
prepared learners and with new learners, as the most attrition occurs in those situations. In other instances, some
mismatching may be appropriate so that learners' experiences help them learn in new ways and to bring into play ways
of thinking and aspects of the self not previously developed. Any mismatching, however, should be done with
sensitivity and consideration for learners, because the experience of discontinuity can be very threatening, particularly
when learners are weak in these areas. Knowledge of learning style can thus help teachers design teaching strategies
appropriate for learners in terms of matching or mismatching.
B. From this Understanding, why do we Focus on Teaching Strategies rather than Learning Strategies?
1. What are teaching strategies?
In Gagne‟s (1985) view, teaching strategies are conditions required for the acquisition of knowledge and skill. From
a framework by Ellis (1994), teaching strategies are looked upon as any problem-oriented actions taken by the teacher
during the classroom process to surmount specific obstacles to learner performance. Such actions must be conscious and
deliberate, deployed by the teacher with cautious attention, which can result in both linguistic and non-linguistic
behavior.
2. Why do we focus on teaching strategies rather than learning strategies?
Compared to learning, teaching represents a dimension of facility that is easier for teachers to keep in check. As
Hyman and Rosoff (1987, p. 185) suggest, the maximum level of control the teacher could have in the classroom is the
control over his or her own actions – no matter what the learners‟ learning styles and no matter what the subject matter.
Moreover, before we teachers could blame learners for not co-operating with us, we have to demonstrate a realistic
example of good will by having the courage to reflect on the way we teach. We can always learn from the behavior
modification approach that to change learners‟ behavior we must first change the way in which we have tended to
respond to this behavior (Fontana 1994: 63-64).
C. Benefits of Classroom Interaction

© 2011 ACADEMY PUBLISHER

288

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE TEACHING AND RESEARCH

Gibson and Chandler (1988, p. 160) have raised the awareness of the value, purpose and rationale of a more
interactive classroom process. They encourage conscious and purposeful use of classroom contributions as a way of
constructing and developing the lesson. Scarella and Oxford (1992) point out that “innate mechanisms do not work
alone. If they did, students could learn English by themselves, without interacting with others. But students do not learn
English alone” (p. 29). Learners‟ contributions also can serve as a foundation for the teacher to obtain information
regarding their knowledge, understanding, and degree of agreement. A lack of such information in many cases might
cause the teacher to develop the lesson in an undesirable direction that fails to meet learners‟ interests, preferences,
concerns, and needs.
Understanding learners  Applying appropriate teaching strategies  Increasing interaction  Further
understanding learners  Fixing mismatched expectations
For this reason, learners should give the teacher opportunities to decide how to adjust and develop the lesson to best
benefit them. As suggested by Harker (1988, p. 223), it is through the teacher-learner communication process that
expectations are created for how the lesson needs to be organised. The absence of this process can explicate several of
the reasons why the expectations of teacher and learners often clash. Good and Brophy (1987, pp. 296-303) refer to
such mismatched expectations as „self-fulfilling effects,‟ which are destructive attitudes resulting from a lack of
negotiation. For a resolution, Harker (1988, p. 223) points out that understanding classroom events requires interpreting
events within the frames developed by learners and teachers through interaction in the lesson and through their history
of interaction in similar lessons.
III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
A. Participants
168 students of eight intermediate and upper-intermediate EFL classes and twelve teachers who taught these classes
at the Center for Foreign Languages of the University of Social Sciences and Humanities in Ho Chi Minh City (USSHHCMC) were invited to participate in the study.
1. Student sample
Although the Center for Foreign Languages offer classes of three proficiency levels ranging from elementary (Level
A) to upper-intermediate (Level C) as described in Table 2, the selection of student sample focused on courses of
intermediate (B) and low upper-intermediate proficiency levels (C1, C2) where conditions for a comprehensive
investigation were found.

Proficiency level
Elementary
(Level A)
Intermediate
(Level B)
Upper-intermediate
(Level C)

TABLE 2.
COURSES BY PROFICIENCY LEVELS
Course length
Estimated outcome level
IELTS
TOEFL PBT
270 hours in six 10-week classes
(A1-A6)
3.5-4.0
400
270 hours in four 10-week classes
(B1-B6)
4.5-5.0
450
180 hours in four 10-week classes
(C1-C4)
5.5-6.0
500

TOEFL iBT
30
45
60

Students of intermediate and low upper-intermediate proficiency levels have the extensive history of learning styles
which may differ from their present learning styles. Willing (1988) and other researchers have found that learners will
often adapt their style to the learning situation and so learners of one style may display characteristics of another style at
certain times. The exploration of factors that cause the transition from past to present learning styles, to some extent,
helps realize the effectiveness of the teaching strategies students have received. Beginners with too brief history of
classroom experience will probably limit in-depth exploration.
Interaction reluctance may result from linguistic incompetence as learners struggle in dealing with English sounds
and understanding of grammar patterns (Burns & Joyce, 1997, pp. 134-135). Thus, beginners‟ interaction shyness more
likely due to minimal proficiency level can be misconstrued as a mismatch between learning and teaching styles.
Since the study is the repeated intervention in a sample, the consistency of the participants is required. Administrative
policy at our Center is that the whole class move to next level when they pass a proficiency level, which helps sustain
the consistency of the sample. Due to substantial change of students from a level to another in elementary proficiency
levels resulting from high dropout rates of beginners with low intrinsic motivation, and due to substantial class
shrinkage of top proficiency levels caused by challenge of language, students of intermediate and low upperintermediate level are preferred for sampling.
2. Teacher sample
The teacher sample comprised eight Vietnamese EFL teachers, five females and three males, who had been teaching
at the Center for Foreign Languages of USSH-HCMC. The average age was 39.08 years ranging from 29 to 51 years
old. They were teaching full-time at the tertiary levels of education, of whom six were teaching at public universities
and two at private universities. Four teachers held BA degrees in language education as their highest degree, with the
rest earning MA degrees in TESOL, two from Vietnamese universities and two from Australian universities. The
© 2011 ACADEMY PUBLISHER

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE TEACHING AND RESEARCH

289

participants varied greatly in terms of the length of their teaching experience. The mean years of teaching experience
was 9.88 with a standard deviation 5.27 from the mean.
The primary reason for this selection was the teachers‟ frequent working with students of intermediate and upperintermediate proficiency levels, at the Center as well as at their universities. Their understanding of their students‟
learning styles was explored in the survey, and their intuitive understanding of this proficiency group‟s background and
behavior was shared for data collection at the first phase of the study and classroom remedy at its later phase.
The first participants were sought through my close colleagues. These participants, in turn connected me with other
participants, and this process continued until my relationship with twelve teachers of twelve classes of intermediate and
low upper-intermediate levels was well-established. This snowball sampling method (Robson, 1993) helped obtain
voluntary co-operation from participants.
B. Procedure
The study consisted of three phases
Phase 1: Collecting data from learning styles questionnaires
A questionnaire survey was intended to explore the distribution of learning styles among the students of twelve
intermediate and low upper-intermediate EFL classes. The questionnaire comprising 44 closed-ended questions
suggested by Solomon and Felder (1999) was reproduced in Vietnamese and delivered to the students. Class
observation recorded through field-notes was conducted in these eight classes to measure the level of teacher-student
style matching.
Phase 2: Working out teaching strategies
Discussions with teachers of these involved classes on the mismatch between their teaching styles and their students‟
learning styles found in the questionnaire surveys and class observations. A set of revised teaching strategies which
cater to students‟ learning styles were collaboratively worked out predicated on the distribution of learning styles of
each class.
Phase 3: Experimenting with the teaching strategies and collecting feedback from both teachers and students.
Collaboration work with the involved teachers was conducted to incorporate revised teaching strategies into their
lesson plans and experiment with them in these eight classrooms. Such elements as teachers, students, and teaching
material were preserved in the classroom setting to focus on the only variable, revised teaching strategies.
Repetition of classroom observation on the same classes, under the revised teaching strategies, to measure the
enhancement of student interaction, was recorded by an observation instrument suggested by Wajnryb (1993).
Discussions with teachers and students were held to collect their feedback on the efficiency of revised teaching
strategies.
IV. FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION
Phase 1: Collecting data from learning styles questionnaires
Of 168 questionnaires delivered to the students to survey their learning styles, 154 were returned in completed form
(92% response rate). The distribution of learning styles among these students is displayed in Table 3.
TABLE 3:
LEARNING STYLE DISTRIBUTION (N = 154)
Dimensions of learning styles
n
%
Perception
Sensing
65
42
Intuitive
89
58
Input
Visual
102
66
Verbal
52
34
Processing
Active
87
56
Reflective
67
44
Understanding
Sequential
114
74
Global
40
26

Some mismatches between learning styles and teaching styles were found when class observations showed that six
teachers (75%) are using traditional lecture methods with intuitive, verbal, reflective and sequential characteristics, and
two teachers (25%) are applying visual and global instructional strategies of modern approaches (Table 4).
TABLE 4:
MISMATCHES BETWEEN LEARNING STYLES AND TEACHING STYLES
Learning styles
Lecture approaches
Modern approaches
(six teachers)
(two teachers)
Intuitive (58%)
Intuitive
Intuitive
Visual (66%)
Verbal
Visual
Active (56%)
Reflective
1 Reflective, 1 Active
Sequential (74%)
Sequential
Global

Phase 2: Working out teaching strategies

© 2011 ACADEMY PUBLISHER

290

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE TEACHING AND RESEARCH

Prior to the collaborative work with these teachers on teaching strategies to create teacher-student style matching and
nurture style stretching, the extended discussions with them were made to explore how these learning styles have been
shaped as well as determine which styles are more dynamic and flexible, and which are more static and identity forming.
Intuitive learning style found in 58% of the students, more than the 40% found for a sample of 18,592 general college
students (Myers & McCaulley, 1985) was, according to the involved teachers of this study, inherited from their
language teachers, most of whom are intuitors. As Moody (1988) notes, language is by its nature symbolic, which
would tend to make it more attractive to intuitors than to the more concrete and literal-minded sensors.
The majority of the students chose „visual‟ as their preferred perceptual input modality (66%). The similar result was
found by Reid (1987) in his survey of sensory learning preferences of Korean, Chinese and Japanese students. The
involved teachers believe that it is book-centered and blackboard-centered method that has formed this learning style
for decades. The classroom practice, in which students‟ speaking the target language is primarily choral reading (visualverbal) (Song, 1995), and their listening to the target language is accompanied by scanning the printed text (visualauditory), makes students‟ perceptual channels strongly visual (text and blackboard), with most auditory input closely
tied to the written text. Moreover, the involved teachers brought the interesting feedback from their experimental
classes that college-age students, the „video game‟ generation, have grown up with televisions, movies, videos, and
video games, and developed skills in interpreting visually displayed data. Thus, despite their intuitive learning style, the
students have been carrying a latent sensing learning style waiting to manifest itself under encouraging conditions.
Although more active learners than reflective learners were found in the student sample, surprisingly, processing
styles proved to be dependent on age groups (Table 5).

Age groups
Active
Reflective

TABLE 5:
CORRELATION BETWEEN PROCESSING STYLES AND AGE GROUPS
Under 15
15 – 25
26 – 35
36 – 45
n
%
n
%
n
%
n
15
88
56
60
10
45
5
2
12
37
40
12
55
8

%
38
62

Over 45
n
1
8

%
11
89

As displayed in Table 5, younger learners tend to be active, and older learners tend to be reflective. This result can be
interpreted in terms of teaching method, teaching material, and impact of multimedia. Older learners bring to the
language classes the „ways‟ they used to be taught at high school years back, in which they show much reflection in
preparation for production, as Condon (1984) observed in Japanese students. Like most Asian adults, they are
concerned for precision (Oxford et al., 1992), and reluctant to „stand out‟ by expressing their views, particularly if this
might be perceived as expressing public disagreement (Song, 1995). Older students are also found to be accustomed to
the traditional approach tasks in their high school language textbooks which largely require learners to reflect
thoroughly. Contrarily, younger learners have been exposed to both traditional (in their high schools) and modern (in
language centers) teaching methods since they started to learn English. More fortunately, they are exposed to
communicative tasks of both high school language textbooks and language center materials. The most important factor
that makes younger learners „active‟ is that they have grown up in the world of multimedia full of interactive activities,
which allow them little time to reflect.
The emphasis on rote memory in both oral and written tests in primary schools in Vietnam shapes sequential learning
style in primary students, with which they go through years of high school and university. Their phobia to miss details
makes them detail- and precision-oriented. Grammar-translation method in high schools also contributes to the
development of sequential learning style. Many EFL teachers explain the entire text by breaking it down into sentences,
and analysing new words and grammar structures of these sentences. Some EFL teachers even employ word-by-word
translation to explain a written text. However, the discussions with some teachers of natural sciences such as
mathematics and information technology (IT) showed that they employ a top-down approach to guide students from the
overall itinerary of the solution to each section or module in a logical order. Therefore, students are not completely
encased in sequential learning style. Nevertheless, the belief that learners should learn language in a different way from
how they learn other sciences still preoccupies some students and should be cleared before the strategies on stylestretching are introduced to the experimental classes.
From understanding the causes and the distribution of learning styles of the experimental classes, some teaching
strategies were proposed to create teacher-student style matching and nurture style stretching, which seeks to meet the
goal of a balanced teaching style. Matching teaching styles to learning styles can significantly enhance student behavior
in foreign language instruction (Oxford et al., 1991); however, the teaching styles with which students feel most
comfortable may not correspond to the style that enables them to learn most effectively. A student should not be placed
into one or another style category and taught exclusively according to his or her preferred style. What must be done to
achieve effective foreign language learning is to balance instructional methods, somehow structuring the class so that all
learning styles are simultaneously or at least sequentially accommodated (Oxford, 1990).
Teaching strategies to create teacher-student style matching
Teaching strategies involve choice of tasks, forms of answer, forms of interaction, and references appealing to the
range of learning styles of the experimental classes (Table 6). Task choice involves the choice of pre-task activities, the
task itself and the post-task sharing, all areas during lesson planning in which teachers can provide different forms of
© 2011 ACADEMY PUBLISHER

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE TEACHING AND RESEARCH

291

input and model strategies. Central to considering the range of tasks given is the question of the form in which teachers
want the answer and the accountability of the responses learners give (Hall, 1994). Given that academic tasks drive the
student, the form of an answer will be important to matching a range of learning styles (Doyle, 1983).

Learning
styles
Sensing

Intuitive
Visual

Verbal
Active

Reflective
Sequential

Global

TABLE 6:
TEACHING STRATEGIES TO MATCH DIFFERENT LEARNING STYLES
Teaching strategies
Tasks
Forms of answer
Forms of
interaction
images, sounds, video,
creations of demos,
quizzes with
pair work, group
demos, simulations
images, case studies
accompanying images,
work
audio
case studies, settling and
problem solving
essays that ask for
group work
prediction
outcome projections
use of a video clip,
mind mapping of
identification on maps,
pair work, group
diagram, image or map
concepts (webbing),
diagrams, required
work
diagramming, readings
drawings or sketches,
read and response
summaries, outlines,
journaling, minute
summaries, outlines
group work
debates
writing, peer critiquing
class participation
model building, role
projects, reports
group work
playing, presentations,
surveys/ opinion polls
class time for reflection
problem sets, journaling
problem solving
group work
or critical thinking
outlines, lists, examples
creation of steps,
creation or reenactment
small discussion
processes, scanning
of steps, processes
groups
discussion of concepts

journaling, discussion,
relationship
construction, mapping,
skimming

essay questions

large discussion
groups

References
video or audio clips
from a media collection
readings from various
view points
reference maps,
diagrams, pictures,
articles
observation, reading
questionnaires

observation, reading
reference materials of a
procedural nature,
scholarly journals
broad based reference
materials, newspaper
articles, magazines and
books

Teaching strategies to nurture style stretching
Learning style is a consistent way of functioning which reflects cultural behavior patterns and, like other behaviors
influenced by cultural experiences, may be transformed as a result of training in learning experiences. Learning styles
are thus “moderately strong habits rather than intractable biological attributes” (Reid, 1987, p. 100). With a moderate
training or guidance by teachers, sub or unconscious styles can become conscious learning strategies. However, while
teachers are guiding students into some learning styles, they have to guide themselves into the teaching styles they are
not accustomed to. The way they normally teach addresses the needs of at least four of the specified learning style
categories: regular use of some of the teaching strategies below suggested by Kolb (1984) and Felder (1993) should
suffice to cover the remaining four.
 Motivate learning. As much as possible, teach new material (vocabulary, rules of grammar) in the context of
situations to which the students can relate in terms of their personal and career experiences, past and anticipated, rather
than simply as more material to memorize (intuitive, global).
 Balance concrete information (word definitions, rules for verb conjugation and adjective-noun agreement)
(sensing) and conceptual information (syntactical and semantic patterns, comparisons and contrasts with the students‟
native language) (intuition).
 Balance structured teaching approaches that emphasize formal training (sequential) with more open-ended
unstructured activities that emphasis conversation and cultural contexts of the target language (global).
 Make extensive use of visuals. Use photographs, drawings, sketches, and cartoons to illustrate and reinforce the
meanings of vocabulary words. Show films, videotapes, and live dramatizations to illustrate lessons in texts (visual,
global).
 Assign some repetitive drill exercises to provide practice in basic vocabulary and grammar (sensing) but do not
overdo it (intuitive).
 Do not fill every minute of class time lecturing and writing on the board. Provide intervals – however brief – for
students to think about what they have been told; assign brief writing exercises (reflective). Raise questions and
problems to be worked on by students in small groups; enact dialogues and mini-dramas; hold team competitions
(active).
 Give students the option of cooperating on at least some homework assignments (active). Active learners generally
learn best when they interact with others; if they are denied the opportunity to do so they are being deprived of their
most effective learning tool.
 The lesson is designed as a ‘flow’ from getting involved (concrete experience) to listening/observing (reflective
observation) to creating an idea (abstract conceptualization) to making decisions (active experimentation) as a result of
combining two dimensions of perception (sensing/intuitive) with two dimensions of processing (active/reflective)
 Alternate style-like groupings and style-varied groupings for generating the greatest flexibility of styles.
Teaching strategies to encourage changes in students‟ learning styles
© 2011 ACADEMY PUBLISHER

292

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE TEACHING AND RESEARCH

One important aspect of action research is the acceptance of people as they are in the first place, and with this
understanding, support them as they perform tasks and activities (Stringer, 1999, pp. 122-123). Since Vietnamese
students tend to be afraid of taking risk (Ellis, 1995, p. 200), teachers „need to create environments where students feel
safe enough to try out new behaviors‟ (Scarcella, 1990, p. 7).
 Teachers should show their respect for students‟ own learning styles, help them see the benefits of style range
expansion, and keep them well informed of the experimental process. As action researchers, teachers should arrange to
advise students about what is happening in ways that they can understand (Stringer, 1999, p. 122). Wu (1983) concludes
that Chinese students usually respond well to activities when they realize what the purposes behind them are.
 Even though students fully understand the benefits of style stretching, they may give up halfway through the
experimental process, since they do not find lesson content meaningful and interesting to them. Matching the difficulty
level of the material to learner ability, bringing learning topics closer to students‟ local sensitivity, and keeping
activities related to students‟ culture make the pathway to unfamiliar learning styles appear smoother and shorter to
students.
Phase 3: Experimenting with the teaching strategies and collecting feedback from both students and teachers.
The experimental process consists of two subphases, creating teacher-student style matching and nurturing style
stretching. The first subphase was conducted in May and June 2010, and the second subphase in July and August 2010.
In the first subphase, teaching activities were designed to match the distribution of each experimental class, and stylelike groupings were chosen for group activities.
TABLE 7:
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TEACHER-STUDENT STYLE MATCHING AND CLASS INTERACTION INCREASE
Interaction increase
over 50%
20-50%
0-<20%
Teacher-student matching
2 classes
1 class
Teacher-student mismatching
2 classes
2 classes
1 class
Total
4 classes
3 classes
1 class

As displayed in Table 7, there are three classes in which the teachers managed to accommodate their teaching styles
to their students‟ learning styles, and there are five classes in which the teachers, in different degrees, failed to reach out
to the distribution of learning styles. Especially one teacher of this study tried to apply revised teaching strategies in her
class in 2 weeks alone, and then gave up and returned to her usual teaching way in which she felt completely
comfortable for the rest of the study length (<20% interaction increase). Interestingly, substantial class interaction
increase (>50%) was observed not only in the style matching classes (two classes) but also in the style mismatching
classes (two classes). On the contrary, one class, even though teacher-student style matching occurred, displayed a
subtle improvement in class verbal interaction (20-50% increased). Class observations and discussions with the students
of these two style mismatching classes without their teachers‟ presence showed that it was the teachers‟ inherent
qualities that made up for their style mismatching and contributed to their success. Class observations found a
cooperative, encouraging, and relaxed atmosphere in these classes the teachers created by incorporating fun activities,
avoiding grammatical correction, and enhancing students‟ self-esteem. Gibson and Chandler (1988, p. 394) observe that
students often learn most from teachers who do their best to increase their self-esteem. Most of the students of these
classes said they loved their teachers since their teachers welcomed their contribution with warmth and respect, listened
to them attentively, praised their attempt or content whenever possible, and occasionally used their ideas for further
discussion to make them feel significant. They welcomed their teachers as their self-esteem was enhanced by their
teachers. In contrast, in the style matching class with a slight interaction increase (20-50%), the teacher seemed to keep
his distance from his students, which probably led to his failure in the experiment. In the language classroom, like in
other social settings, there is the need to establish and maintain friendly relationship (Malamah-Thomas, 1996); and
personal and cooperative relationship is viewed by Stringer (1999, p. 122) as an important aspect of action research.
In the second subphase of the experimental process, style-stretching strategies and style-varied groupings were
introduced into the classrooms to expand students‟ learning styles. Table 8 shows the outcomes of both experimental
subphases.

Subphase 1
Subphase 2

TABLE 8:
INCORPORATING STYLE-STRETCHING STRATEGIES
Interaction increase
over 50%
20-50%
Number of classes
4 classes
3 classes
Further interaction
1 class : >50%
1 class: >50%
increase
3 classes: 20-50%
1 class: 20-50%
1 class: NO

0-<20%
1 class
NO

Class observations showed that the teacher, who had given up adapting her style to learners‟ styles in the first
subphase, again failed to enhance classroom interaction. In six out of the remaining experimental classes, the teachers
felt more comfortable to vary teaching styles in the classrooms as they had chance to exert teaching styles of their
strength, so verbal interaction in these classes was further enhanced. However, in the style matching class which had not
been very successful in the first subphase (20-50% interaction increase), mismatching strategies failed. The students,

© 2011 ACADEMY PUBLISHER

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE TEACHING AND RESEARCH

293

81% of whom were adults, were unreceptive to these strategies, and some even doubted their effectiveness. They
showed a deep dissatisfaction through dropouts. Cooper and Miller (1991) found a significant positive relationship
between teacher-student style congruency and student satisfaction. Lorge (1947), writing about effective methods in
adult education, suggested that to reach the adult learner, you have to teach what adults want. In his theory of andragogy,
an attempt to differentiate the way adults learn from the way children learn, Knowles (1973) assumed that adult learners
are self-directing, and thus prefer to determine what, how, and when they learn. In this study, the element „age‟ was
considered a constant, which led to the failure in one experimental class; so the role of this element in learning styles
deserves further research.
V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Teaching is an interesting profession with new approaches expanding teachers‟ roles and giving teachers more
insights into how to help their learners (Larsen-Freeman, 1988). A key to getting and keeping students actively
immersed in learning lies in understanding their learning style preferences. The findings of this study can help
Vietnamese EFL teachers understand the pattern of learning styles in Vietnamese EFL classrooms as well as find out
teacher-learner style mismatches in their own classrooms, which have caused learners‟ dissatisfaction and low
performance. In this research, the multi-style teaching strategies were applied to meet the learners where they stood and
help them widen their horizon in learning. The results substantiated the benefits of style matching and stretching;
nonetheless, the failures found in the class where adult learners failed to respond to style stretching strategies and in the
class where the teacher failed to respond to learners‟ learning styles remind teachers that there subsist other learner
factors, teacher factors, and learning environment factors beside learning and teaching styles, and we teachers ever
remain learners, seeking further understanding their impact on style matching and stretching strategies.
REFERENCES
[1]

Brindley, G. (1989). The role of needs analysis in adult ESL programme design. In R. K. Johnson (Ed.), The Second Language
Curriculum. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[2] Burns, A., & Joyce, H. (1997). Focus on speaking. Sydney: National Center for English Language Teaching and Research.
[3] Carbo, M., & Hodges, H. (1988, Summer). Learning styles strategies can help students at risk. Teaching Exceptional Children,
pp. 48-51.
[4] Condon, J. (1984). With respect to the Japanese. Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press.
[5] Cooper, S., & Miller, J. (1991). MBTI learning style–teaching style discongruencies. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 51, 699-706.
[6] Corder, S. P. (1977). Language teaching and learning: A social encounter. In Brown, H., Yorio, C. and Crymes, R. (Eds.), On
TESOL '77. Washington D.C.: TESOL.
[7] Dewar, T. (1999). Adult learning online. Retrieved March 26, 2003 from http://www.calliopelearning.com/adult.htm
[8] Doyle, W. (1983). Academic work. Review of Educational Research 53(2), 159-199.
[9] Dunn, R., & Dunn, K. (1978). Teaching students through their individual learning styles. Reston, VA: Reston Publishing
Company, Inc.
[10] Ellis, R. (1994). The study of second language acquisition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[11] Ellis, C. (1995). Culture shock! Vietnam. Singapore – Kuala Lumpur: Times Book International.
[12] Ehrman, M. E. (1996). Understanding second language learning difficulties. California: SAGE Publications.
[13] Felder, R. M. (1993). Reaching the second tier: Learning and teaching styles in college science education. J. College Science
Teaching, 23(5), 286-290.
[14] Felder, R. M., & Silverman, L. K. (1988). Learning and teaching styles in engineering education. Engineering Education, 78,
674-681.
[15] Fontana, D. (1994). Managing classroom behavior. Leicester: The British Psychological Society.
[16] Gagne, R. (1985). The conditions of learning. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
[17] Gibson, J. T. & Chandler, L. A. (1988). Educational psychology –Mastering principles and applications. Boston: Allyn and
Bacon, Inc.
[18] Good, T. & Brophy, J (1987). Teacher expectations as self-fulfilling prophecies. In Clarizio, Harvey F., Rober C. Craig, &
William A. Mehrens (Eds.), Contemporary Issues in Educational Psychology. New York: Random House.
[19] Gregorc, A. F., & Ward, H. B. (1977, February). A new definition for individual. NASSP Bulletin, p. 5.
[20] Hall, S. J. (1994). Task as a unit of teaching analysis. In Bird, N., Falvey, P., Tsui, A. B. M., Allison, D. M., & McNeill, A.
(Eds.), Language and Learning (pp. 98-125). Hong Kong: Institute of Education.
[21] Harker, J. O. (1988). Individual and team approaches: An introduction. In Green, Judith L. & Judith O. Karker (Eds.), Multiple
Perspective Analysis of Classroom Discourse. New Jersey: Ablex Publishing Corporation.
[22] Hyman, R., & Rosoff, B. (1987). Matching learning and teaching styles: The jug and what‟s in it. In Clarizio, Harvey F.,
Robert C. Craig, & William A. Mehrens (Eds.), Contemporary Issues in Educational Psychology. New York: Random House.
[23] Irvine, J. J., & York, D. E. (1995). Learning styles and culturally diverse students: A literature review. In James A. Banks (Ed.),
Handbook of Research on Multicultural Education (pp. 484-497). New York: Simon & Schuster Macmillan.
[24] James, W. B., & Gardner, D. L. (1995). Learning styles: Implications for distance learning. New Directions for Adult and
Continuing Education, 67, 19-32.
[25] Keefe, J. W. (1991). Learning style: Cognitive and thinking skills. Reston, VA: National Association of Secondary School
Principals.

© 2011 ACADEMY PUBLISHER

294

JOURNAL OF LANGUAGE TEACHING AND RESEARCH

[26] Keefe, J. W. (1987). Theory and practice. Reston, VA: National Association of Secondary School Principals.
[27] Knowles, M. (1973). The adult learner: A neglected species. Houston, TX: Gulf Publishing Company.
[28] Kolb, D. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall.
[29] Larsen-Freeman, D. (1998). Expanding roles of learners and teachers in learner-centered instruction. In Renandya, W. A. &
Jacobs, G. M. (Eds.), Learners and Language Learning (pp. 207-226). Anthology Series 39. Singapore: Seameo Regional
Language Centre.
[30] Lorge, I. (1947). Effective methods in adult education: Report of the Southern regional workshop for agricultural extension
specialists. Raleigh, NC: North Carolina State College.
[31] Long, M. H. & Sato, C. (1993). Classroom foreigner talk discourse: Forms and functions of teachers‟ questions. In H. W.
Seliger & M. H. Long (Eds.), Classroom-Oriented Research on Second Language Acquisition (pp. 268-285). Rowley, Mass.:
Newbury House.
[32] Malamah-Thomas, A. (1996). Classroom interaction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[33] Merriam, S. B., & Caffarella, R. S. (1991). Learning in adulthood. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
[34] Moody, R. (1988). Personality preferences and foreign language learning. The Modern Language Journal, 72, 389-401.
[35] Myers, I. B., & McCaulley, M. H. (1985). Manual: A guide to the development and use of the myersbriggs type indicator. Palo
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
[36] Oxford, R. L. (1990). Missing link: Evidence from research on language learning styles and strategies. In Georgetown
University Round Table on Languages and Linguistics. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Presss.
[37] Oxford, R. L., Ehrman, M., & Lavine, R. (1991). Style wars: Teacher-student style conflicts in the language classroom. In
Magnan, S. (Ed.), Challenges in the 1990’s for College Foreign Language Programs. Boston: Heinle and Heinle.
[38] Oxford, R. L., Hollaway, M. E., & Murillo, D. (1992). Language learning styles: Research and practical considerations for
teaching in the multicultural tertiary ESL/EFL classroom. System, 20/4, 439-445.
[39] O‟Sullivan, N. (1997). Teaching English in Southeast Asia. Lincohnwood, Illinois: Passport Books.
[40] Reid, J. (1987). The learning style preferences of ESL students. TESOL Quarterly, 21/1, 87-111.
[41] Reiff, J. C. (1992). Learning styles. Washington, D. C.: National Education Association.
[42] Renandya, W. A., Lim, W. L., Leong, K. W. & Jacobs, G. M. (2001, January). A survey of English language teaching trends
and practices in Southeast Asia [Lecture Notes]. Singapore: SEAMEO Regional Language Centre.
[43] Robson, C. (1993). Real world research: A resource for social scientists and practitioner-researchers. Oxford: Blackwell.
[44] Rollman, M. (1994). The communicative language teaching „revolution‟ tested: A comparison of two classroom studies: 1976
and 1993. Foreign Language Annuals, 27, 221-239.
[45] Scarcella, R. (1990). Teaching language minority students in the multicultural classroom. Englewood, New Jersey: Prentice
Hall Regents.
[46] Scarella, R. C., & Oxford, R. L. (1992). The tapestry of language learning. Boston: Heinle & Heinle Publishers.
[47] Solomon, B. A., & Felder, R. M. (1999). Index of learning styles questionnaire. Retrieved March 26, 2003 from
http://www.ncsu.edu/felder-public/ILSdir/ilsweb.html
[48] Song, B. (1995). What does reading mean for East Asian students? College ESL, 5/2, 35-48.
[49] Stringer, E. T. (1999). Action research (2nd ed.). California: SAGE Publications.
[50] Talmadge, G. K., & Shearer, J. W. (1969). Relationship among learning styles, instructional methods and the nature of learning
experiences. Journal of Educational Psychology, 57, 222-230.
[51] Tobias, S. (1990). They‟re not dumb, they‟re different: Stalking the second tier. Tucson: Research Corporation.
[52] Wajnryb, R. (1993). Classroom observation tasks – A resource book for language teachers and trainers. Glassgow: Cambridge
University Press.
[53] Willing, K. (1988). Learning styles in adult migrant education. Adelaide: National Curriculum Resource Center.
[54] Wu, J. Y. (1983). Quchang Buduan–A Chinese view of foreign participation inteaching English in China. Language Learning
and Communication, 2/1, 111-116.

Luu Trong Tuan is currently an EFL teacher at National University of Ho Chi Minh City. He received his M.TESOL from
Victoria University, Australia in 2004. Besides his focus on TESOL, his recent publications such as Language Transfer is Cultural
Transfer between Communities, Social Sciences Review, No. 11, 2004, pp. 60-63; and Principles for Scientific Translation, Social
Sciences Review, No. 8, 2004, pp. 63-67; and Building Vietnamese Medical Terminology via Language Contact, Australian Journal
of Linguistics, Vol. 29, No. 3, September 2009, pp. 315-336 show his interest in language contact and translation areas.

© 2011 ACADEMY PUBLISHER

View publication stats

