A Business Owner’s
Guide to

WEBSITE DESIGN

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION

2

CHAPTER 1: Importance of Web design For Your Business

3

CHAPTER 2: If Content Is King, Your Website is the Kingdom

11

CHAPTER 3: Performance Matters Make Your Website Work for You!

16

CHAPTER 4: Web Design Trends You Need to Know

27

CHAPTER 5: Should I get a web design agency?

30

INTRODUCTION
Do you remember the first time you saw a website?

With almost 2 billion websites on the world wide web, getting
noticed is quite a challenge. Most people don’t look past the

The first web page went live on August 6, 1991. It was dedicated

first page of the search engine results. So, getting seen takes

to information on the World Wide Web project and was made

an understanding of how your website and the internet works,

by Tim Berners-Lee. It ran on a NeXT computer at the European

and how people use it.

Organization for Nuclear Research, CERN.
The internet is always changing. This means that the type of
The first web page address was http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/

content you create, your marketing strategies, the way people

WWW/TheProject.html.

interact with their mobile devices, how consumers make online
purchases, and how people search for information, are also in

A website puts your business from the whole world.

a constant state of change. How to stay up with it all?

Did you ever imagine that the internet and websites would

In this eBook is a collection of articles gathered from over two

become such a big part of modern life? Did you ever imagine

decades of experience in digital marketing and web design.

that your livelihood could depend on it? For many it does.
Website owners of all kinds – bloggers, companies, and
ecommerce owners reap the rewards of this amazing
technology.

2

CHAPTER 1

Importance of Web Design
For Your Business
Web design can make or break a sale. One of the major
factors influencing a visitor to stay on a site and eventually
buy or to leave without converting is the design of the
website. Website design, especially with e-commerce shops,
can make a difference as much as 30% in conversions and
will help you stay ahead of the competition.
What works in web design changes as search habits change
and user experience experts learn more about user’s
behavior. So, it is important to stay up on the latest design
practices and implement them.
Web design is a big factor in the progress of your business. It
can determine the future of a website and its potential to
create business and gain potential clients. A properly
designed & optimized website can spell the difference
between a business meeting its yearly goal of making X
sales or going bust

It may not be the main reason, but it’s a factor that made a
lead into a buyer. Why does web design matter to potential
clients? Your potential customer doesn’t have enough time
to view your site unless its content is interesting or you’re
simply just a very popular company. What if you are not a
big company?
And your web design looks dull and dated? Your potential
clients will just go back and click on the competitor’s site.
That is why your web design/content should be as
interesting as possible.
Professional web designers can make your potential client
stay longer on your site, creating an opportunity for you to
pick up good business and make new clients. Web
designing is all about making your visitors glued to your
website and persuading them to make up their minds and
buy your products or add them to your clientele.

3

CHAPTER 1

Factors that will help
your site gain more visitors
Here are 3 guidelines to follow for better web design
– to drive traffic and to gain potential customers.

2. Web content. As you are advertising
your business through your website.
Your web content should be as
1. Web site color. Your website color
should be pleasant and command
authority without alienating potential
clients. Most corporate websites use
the colors blue & green as studies
have shown these colors impress upon
visitor’s professionalism, cleanliness
and it helps to add they are
comfortable to look at on your screen.

informative as possible, it should be
true and it should be the real products
and services your company is offering.
Your web content should speak on your
behalf that will make your potential
client decide to choose your company
and your services. It’s also common to
see customer testimonials to further
persuade potential clients to pursue
the transaction.

3. Easy to navigate or user-friendly.
Your website will contain all the
pertinent information about your
products and services. If your
customer can’t see that, or can’t even
find what he’s looking for, then the
potential sale is lost.
Easy navigation and accessibility are
key in funneling your customers from
the landing page to your shopping
cart or exit page.

CHAPTER 1

Here are 10 more suggestions
to improve your website’s design:
1. Follow established web standards
While there are a lot of new trends and web design ideas
coming into fashion, we need to preface this. There are still
standard website best practices that webpage designers

Some of these established
web standards are:

follow that have changed little over time. Established
standards and website elements to which people have

Consistent design and branding across all pages

become accustomed.

Contact information is placed top right or center

These features consistently work as they follow innate

The main headline, value proposition and call-to-action

human behavior. Behaviors such as reading from left to right

high on the homepage

or seeking the pertinent info at the very beginning of a page.

Main navigation across the top of the screen

Designers by nature are creative and want to step out of the

Social media icons in the website footer

box to create something unique, and this is a good thing.

Put search feature in the header

But some boundaries should be set. When those rules are

Website logo in the top left corner

ignored, it confuses site visitors and can turn them off.
Google research shows that the less your website conforms
to web standards, many users will not perceive a website as
beautiful. For this reason, it is recommended to stick to

Here are more suggestions to improve your web
design besides following standard web design
guidelines and best practices.

certain established rules.

5

10 more suggestions to improve your website’s design

CHAPTER 1

2. Minimalist web design
A trend that has been evolving over the past several years

Sidebars - The trend now in website design is to get rid of

to become a regular feature with many websites is the

sidebars. Ask yourself, is it really important what is

“minimalist” approach. Having too many choices will just

displayed in your sidebar? If not – cast the sidebar aside.

confuse users of your website. Consumers can just end up

Reduce the number of fields on your forms, only get

not converting because they can’t make their mind.

important information.

Remove everything that doesn’t serve the main objective

Sales jargon - Stop using overused phrases, clichés, and

of your site. Simple website design can be more effective

empty words that make people tune out. Put some

than one with visual complexity, which can overwhelm the

personality and honesty in your writing.

viewer and lower your website’s appeal.
Minimize text - A feature of the minimalist approach is,
Some design elements you can safely eliminate or reduce are:
Menu items - Visitors need to explore your site but an
overloaded web design for menus can confuse and
negatively affect the user experience.
Tabs - Use as few tabs as possible for a simple website
design.

don’t fill your homepage or landing pages with a lot of
text. This does not apply to blogs, which can use a lot of
text.
Use visuals to help break up written content and offer a
deeper explanation. People will understand your
message better in less time. Learn how to tell your story
with minimum talk.

6

10 more suggestions to improve your website’s design

3. White space design
One of the biggest changes in web design that has been
evolving over the years is website builders are using a lot
more white-space. Content that has no real purpose other

CHAPTER 1

Advantages of White Space:
Improves readability and comprehension
Creates balance

than filling up empty space is just clutter. Visitors to your

Gives emphasis and direction

website like a clean look that gets to the point. Your page

Implies sophistication

will also load faster.

Ensures a quality user experience

Keeping the look more open increases the readability of
your website content. Visitors are usually in a rush when
browsing through websites. With plenty of white space, it
increases interaction by limiting distractions that slow the
visitor down.

Sometimes clients will complain that white space is
wasted space, thinking it could be used to show more
information or other visual elements. Convince them that
the latest trends in web design are to have more space
and UX shows that it helps bring them more conversions.

7

10 more suggestions to improve your website’s design

CHAPTER 1

4. The first fold rules
The first fold of your homepage or any webpage needs to

Your webpage needs to load within 6-7 seconds, as

be designed in such a way to get the visitor hooked right

that’s the level of patience an average user has, after

away. The first fold should have a value proposition,

which they will bounce right off. Ask yourself, after 5

a good reason to NOT leave your site. You don’t have long

seconds of loading your company’s website or landing

before a visitor will bounce off if there is not something to

page, can your visitors understand what your company

encourage the customer to explore further.

does or what services you offer?
Google uses Page Speed as a ranking factor, so poorly
performing websites that don’t load correctly or load

5. Focus on website speed optimization
Make web performance a priority. Improving the speed

slowly, can hurt your site’s ranking. You can get
pagespeed insight by using one of the many free web
speed test applications on the internet.

at which your site loads is not a new thing, but the new
younger internet generation is even more impatient

Make sure website design doesn’t have too much data,

than the previous one. If your site is slow to load,

heavy images, and videos on any of your web pages that

visitors will leave.

slow it down. Make your website clean and simple by
removing unnecessary data and compressing images
and videos.

8

10 more suggestions to improve your website’s design

CHAPTER 1

6. Try a Flat Design
Flat design is a minimalist design concept. It stresses the
use of simple, monochromatic shapes. It still conveys the
same meaning, but the file size is half of a more realistic
shape that has gradients and shadows. Flat designs also
require fewer lines of code than if you create a more
realistic look.
Another advantage for web designers is that flat designs
are easier and faster to modify if needed. Flat simple

The user experience is a big factor in whether they
stay or leave your website. Don’t use features such as
sliders, carousels, tabs or accordions on a handheld
device. They may look cool, but they make it difficult
for the user to navigate.

8. Avoid stock images

website design allows you to customize the look of a page

Avoid using stock photography and invest in getting your

with fewer changes.

photos clicked. Show visitors something they have never
seen before. No matter how professional the stock photo or
graphic is, it will always be someone else’s vision and

7. Design for scrolling, not clicks
When considering your web design, remember that
most browsing is done on mobile devices with touch
screens. It is easier to scroll on touchscreens than to
click on them. Users prefer content they can scroll down.

interpretation of what you are trying to convey.
Use your graphics team to design unique images that
match your branding and vision and apply it to the
content. Just using the same old tired image of someone
sitting at a computer with the seemingly mandatory cup of
coffee falls flat.

9

10 more suggestions to improve your website’s design

CHAPTER 1

9. Pepper your site with Testimonials
If you have clients that say good things about you, the best
way to get them in front of visitors to your site is to add
them throughout your site.

10. Use AMP to make your site mobile-friendly
Having a mobile-friendly site is a must-have. Mobilefriendly web pages rank higher in mobile search results
versus non-mobile-friendly pages. To optimize your
website for mobile, use AMP, Accelerated Mobile Pages.
AMP is an open-source web component framework and a
website publishing technology developed by Google
which provides fast-loading web content. You can
download it for free from different sources. AMP also
comes as a plugin for WordPress.

10

CHAPTER 2

If Content Is King,
Your Website is
the Kingdom
“Content is king,” is a saying going around in the digital
marketing industry. Almost everyone has undoubtedly heard
this phrase, along with the simple truth that web content is
the reason why people end up in web pages developed by
designers. But if content is deemed king, where does it leave
web design? If you come to think of it, where will your content
land if you don’t have a proper place for it?

11

What You Should Know About Website Design

What You Should Know About
Website Design

CHAPTER 2

Content
The king and its kingdom go hand-in-hand. They work
together to enhance the message of the site through

In today’s world run by technology, any successful

pleasing visuals and text. Written text should always be

business needs a team of exceptional internet marketing

relevant, so as not to confuse the reader and to give them

professionals to help them reach their target market.

exactly what they came for to remain on the site. Content

It’s bittersweet that we no longer live in an era where

should be optimized for search engines and be of a

businesses can get by without the aid of the internet

suitable length and incorporate related keywords.

With hundreds and thousands of competitors in just
one industry, one of the main ways to climb the
ladder of success is by having an online presence
designed to perfection.

Layout
It’s through layouts that graphics and text are arranged.
On the worldwide web, a key goal is to help readers and

Your website is the kingdom where content resides. It is the
planning and creation of websites that frames your
content. Within its scope involves many of the same key

viewers find the information they need at a glance.
This includes maintaining the consistency and integrity
of the design.

visual elements of design, such as:

12

What You Should Know About Website Design

CHAPTER 2

Graphics
Graphics include photos, logos, clipart, or icons, all of

All of these elements combined form websites that should

which enhance the aesthetic of the web design. For an

represent whichever businesses they belong to. But

added touch of user-friendliness, these need to be

oftentimes, the meaning of “design” is perceived solely as

placed appropriately, working with the color and content

a visual aspect. In truth, design is the process of collating

of the web page.

ideas, as well as aesthetically arranging and implementing
them guided by certain principles for a specific purpose.

Color
This is dependent on the purpose and preference of the
client. It could be as simple as black-and-white or as
vivid as a multi-colored design, conveying the
personality of an individual or the brand of an
organization, using web-safe colors.

Why It’s Important
When it comes to a website’s success, content really is
king. It is undoubtedly why traffic occurs and why
viewers share a site. But let’s take into consideration
that a website’s design could drastically increase a
visitor’s chances of scrolling down or clicking out.

Fonts

The design of a website plays a large role in making or

The use of different fonts varying in size and face can

breaking your visibility, especially if its structure is not

exponentially enhance a website design. Most web

arranged and designed aesthetically enough for a user

browsers can only read a select number of fonts found in

to keep scrolling down.

the web-safe font category.

13

CHAPTER 2

How to Rule
Your Kingdom
Simplicity
Keeping it simple should be the primary goal of any site
design. Although a website needs to look great, users are
rarely on a site to enjoy the design. Strive for simplicity
and steer clear of complexity.

Navigation
Navigation is all about how easy it is for people to move
around your website. Some tactics for effective
navigation include a logical page hierarchy, designing
clickable buttons, and following the ‘three clicks rule’
which means users will be able to find the information
they need within three clicks.

Images
A picture speaks a thousand words, and choosing the
right images for your website can exponentially help
with brand positioning, as well as help you reach your
target audience. If you don’t have high-quality photos
on hand, consider purchasing photos to lift the
appearance of your website.
There are also many websites online that offer free
usage of high definition photos. Also, consider using
infographics and videos like these can be much more
effective at communicating than even the most wellwritten piece of text.

14

How To Rule Your Kingdom

CHAPTER 2

Mobile-Friendly

Purpose

Not everyone has the time to break out their laptops or

You can’t just create web pages and not have a solid

turn on their PCs to check the internet. Our smartphones,

purpose. Good web design always caters to the needs of

on the other hand, are always at the tip of our fingertips.

each user. Are your visitors looking for information,

It is now common to access websites from the

entertainment, or some type of interaction with your

convenience of devices with varying screen sizes, so it is

business? Each page of your website must have a clear

important to consider if your site is mobile friendly.

purpose and must fulfill a specific need for your users in
the most effective ways possible.

Loading Time
No one likes a website that takes decades to load. It prompts
a user to click out and check other competitors. Loading
times can be more effective by optimizing image sizes and
combining codes into a central CSS or JavaScript file.

Grid-Based Layouts

Content may be king, but every king
needs a kingdom to rule or it’ll be
nothing more than a wandering
peasant — or in this case, content
without a home.

Random placement of content on your website can come
across as unsystematic and unpleasing. Grid-based
layouts arrange content into sections, boxes, and columns
that line up and feel balanced, which leads to far betterlooking website design.

15

CHAPTER 3

Performance Matters
- Make Your Website
Work for You!
Everyone has visited and fled from a website that took too
long to load. Do you know if your website is working for you?
Your business reputation depends on it.
Poor performing websites can hurt your website’s overall
ranking. A bad user experience can drive away as much as
88% of your visitors and have negative effects on your
retention and conversion rates.
Users today expect websites to offer a lot of information,
media, and interactivity – all with page load times of two
seconds or less. By not loading correctly or loading slowly,
visitors are not inclined to stay.

When surfing the web, many technical gears are turning
behind the scenes that impact web performance.
The average business owner will run away if you try to
explain this to them.
However, marketers need to have a general
understanding of what these factors are as it affects
performance. If you aren’t getting results from your site,
these technical elements may be the problem.

16

CHAPTER 3

Factors that affect performance
Web performance falls into three categories:

1. Frontend User Experience – how the user’s
browser executes page’s content.

3. Content Complexity – the breakdown of the
building blocks of your website:

When your site’s title appears in the

Media and programming languages used

browser tab

on your site

When your site’s first visuals are

How many assets each one has

displayed in the frame

How byte-heavy those assets are

When the visitor can interact with
your site

2. Backend Performance – how your site
gets to the visitor’s browser.
Hosting provider
DNS provider
Content delivery network

17

CHAPTER 3

UX – User Experience
Website performance doesn’t have anything to do with
the content; it has to do with the experience that is being
presented to the consumer. A website can have the latest
technology or the coolest graphics and movement, but if
the page is not tuned to performance, then you could be
driving traffic away from your business.
Remember what they say about first impressions!
Whatever kind of site you have, certain factors are nonstarters. There are sites out there that we think are cutting
edge and others that we come across that look as if they
were built in the 19 nineties.

If your customers are interested, they may hit refresh,
however, most times they just close that tab and

There can be different approaches to design and

move on to another site – never to return.

implementation and everyone has been to a site that
doesn’t load very quickly and have certain elements that

What are the primary reasons website performance

don’t load at all.

matters? Poorly performing websites can hurt your
site’s overall ranking, just by not loading correctly or
loading slowly.

18

CHAPTER 3

Slow websites
drive away customers!
Users will often click away from the site or do a “rage

Users remember when they had a poor experience.

quit” and they just close the browser. In web analytic

Visitors to poor performing sites have a lower rate of

terms, this is called an increased bounce rate, they go to

return to that site. This is called a reduction in return

the first page of the site and then they close it.

visitor traffic and is not a great way of building your
marketing reach online.

Furthermore, this will also decrease the click-through rate
metrics – the overall time spent on your site. If people

Also, poor-performing sites that are crawled by

land on your first page and then want to click through

Google and other search engines are lowered in the

and see other elements on that page, and have a poor

search ranking, which will then greatly reduce your

experience right from the beginning, and they go away –

traffic overall. This has a snowball effect as the lower

the click-through rate drops also.

search rankings will have lower views in search
results, equaling lower page hits. This is why web

Therefore, if part of your site has better speed and load

performance matters!

performance, it’s more likely that those pages are doing
better in the SEO engagement metrics as well.

19

CHAPTER 3

Best Practices
for web performance
Reduce the size of your pages - Websites have had
multiple faces over the years. In the early days, all content was
being served over an 18-baud modem. Great importance was
put into what was sent over that very small pipe.
As speeds to the homes and businesses have increased, web

Image size - 8-megapixel images can be anywhere from 5

developers have spent more time stretching the limits of what

megabytes to 7 megabytes per image. The supported pixel

they could build. Scripting in graphics and performance mostly

sizes for 8-megapixel images are 3,456 by 2,304 pixels. The

went by the wayside.

majority of desktop monitors are sized at 1980 by 1080 pixels.
Therefore, 8-megabit high-resolution images are too big for

Now with the capabilities of producing high-resolution 4K video

any screen on which your website would be displayed.

and 12 plus megapixel pictures that are readily available for all,
it’s very easy to ruin a very well-performing site. Simply

Most likely, the images are being shrunk at the server level and

uploading a couple of images from the new DSLR camera that

are being compressed at the image level, but still, the file size

you’re gifted over the holidays can wreak havoc on your

that is being sent across the pipe is much larger than needed

website’s performance.

and will slow your site load time.

One of the easiest ways to improve page performance is to

Right-sizing the images on your web platform will reduce the

reduce the overall size of each page. This doesn’t mean to

size of each image by approximately 60 percent for every

remove or reduce content from the site, but to be smart about

image. Multiply that by 4 to 5 images per page and you can

how you’re providing what comes to your end-user.

see the savings add up.

20

Best Practices For Web Performance

CHAPTER 3

Page purpose - Building pages that serve one or two purposes

If there’s a need for larger content to be served like video or

with navigation links on other pages rather than one big page

other large files utilizing a CDN, (Content Distribution Network)

that has 10 to 12 purposes, is also a great way of having a well-

can greatly increase the performance and uptime of your

performing site. Most of that information on a big page will be

website. Some content will be from your server and other

wasted on the end-user and the page will load slower.

content will be delivered by the CDN.

Smaller pages will load faster-engaging your users to click

Proper page load order - Next, you want to find and update

through to other pages and increasing their overall time on the

page elements that are causing other parts of your page to be

site and increasing other SEO based metrics.

slow. You need to make sure that the elements of your page
are loaded in the proper order. Elements that are at the top of

Expiration dates - Make sure your site has proper expiration
dates on caching elements such as images, content, and
external files. These settings establish how long the browser will

the page should be loaded first, and elements that may be offscreen or at the bottom of the page are some of the last ones
that should be loaded.

store that element locally – without causing additional calls to
the webserver.
If certain images are not changed that often, put a larger
expiration date on them like 8 weeks. While for the content that
does change often, you can have a shorter retention rate to
make sure it’s not being cached as much.

21

Best Practices For Web Performance

CHAPTER 3

Blocking elements - Then some things slow your load

SSL Certificates - Last on the list of best practices for web

speed down called blocking elements.

performance is SSL Certificates.

For example, say that you have a site where you’re showing

Everyone should be familiar with HTTP – HyperText Transfer

the customer location and your site asks for a zipcode and

Protocol, the basis of data communication for the internet.

then shows a map of a location near that zip.

The addition of the “S” for “Secure” shows that three extra layers
of protection have been added that protects the integrity and

The first step is to look up the location in the database and

confidentiality of your users’ data.

the next step is to send those findings to the mapping API
(application programming interface) and see if the database

When you see a site with HTTPS in front of it rather than HTTP,

search is blocking the maps API.

that site has an SSL certificate.

While both parts are required to show the map, the one thing

One of the most popular features in mapping utilities is a find

you can do is make sure that the database search is working

my location service. If you’re planning on using a find my

properly and not further delaying the time it would perform

location service on your site, Google Maps have recently

the map API.

changed their security settings to require an SSL certificate to
access any of those advanced browser functions from the user.

There are other elements along those lines. This is just a
simple way of explaining how one element is required to be
completed before another one and making sure that those
are loading in the proper order.

22

Best Practices For Web Performance

CHAPTER 3

It might seem like overkill if you’re just providing a marketing site
with some mapping and information about your location to have
the added expense of an SSL certificate. If you’re not doing
ecommerce or if you’re not doing authentication on your site,
why have the extra cost?
Increasing numbers of internal browser functions that are pulling
information from your users are requiring sites to have an SSL.
Make sure that you’re working with a hosting provider that is
aware of these recent security changes and providing the proper
security settings for your site. It’s not the only reason for having
an SSL, but it is one more way to make your website perform
better. Learn more about SSL Certificates.

23

CHAPTER 3

Mobile Performance
What exactly does it mean
to be mobile responsive?
First. Make sure that your site is not just supported by mobile;
you want a site that is displayed in the best manner for that
medium. Make your mobile view very similar in look and feel
to your desktop view.
Often people will go home and then they’ll bring it up on their
desktop computer and if it doesn’t look like the mobile site
they will wonder if they are on the right site.
Moving into 2020, Google is continuing to put a higher
emphasis on mobile responsiveness for search rankings.
It’s just not how well your desktop site performs
– it’s also how well your mobile site performs.
Sites that have both a desktop version and a mobile version
will get a better ranking from Google and show better up on
their search results. Making sure your website is mobile
responsive is more vital than ever. According to INC
magazine, nearly 60 percent of all SMB sites do not have a
mobile responsive website.

When mobile started, designers would split off the code,
build a desktop version, and build a mobile version.
The information on the site would have to be updated on
both versions and so there were inconsistencies between the
content on the mobile site and the desktop site.
Mobile responsiveness is one set of code that displays
properly for desktops and mobile. Mobile has a different set
of objectives such as click to call phone numbers.
There’s also a greater need for maps, especially when using
GPS functionality for the user’s location feature.

24

Mobile Performance

CHAPTER 3

Mobile also has a greater impact on social sharing.

Modal screens - Another element that doesn’t work well is a

Customers can easily market your site by sharing with their

“modal screen.” You might know it as a pop-up or an overlay

friends and family. The user experience on mobile is

such as a form requesting information. Modal screens won’t

different from the experience of desktop consumers.

let users work with the main window once they are opened.
Modal screens do not provide the right performance on

Mobile 3G and 4G are much slower than the cable modem

mobile. There are different ways of being able to do forms

that you have at home or work. Being successful on mobile

that are designed better for mobile.

devices is about ensuring all those functions that are
available on your desktop are served to mobile but served
quickly. Removing some of the elements that are not
necessarily targeted for mobile can help.

Remove byte-hungry media - Considering bytes over the
pipe is very important. You want to remove any auto-playing
of videos or high-end graphics from your mobile view. You
might have them on your desktop but you want to restrict

Certain elements are very popular on desktops that are not

them on mobile. That would make a much better performing

ideal for mobile view. To improve mobile responsiveness

mobile website.

and web performance you can remove those elements.

IFrames - One such example is IFrames. An IFrame
(Inline Frame) is an HTML document embedded inside
another HTML document on a website. It is a common
way of displaying third-party information within your site.
However, what happens on mobile is because you have a

A well-performing mobile responsive website takes all of
these factors into consideration and provides a slightly
different mobile experience. They may be major changes
behind the scenes, but will only be seen as minor changes to
the front-end user.

smaller screen, you’re going to have a scroll. The IFrame
itself will also have a scroll and this calls a double
scrolling menu, which is bad for mobile.

25

CHAPTER 3

Fixing your
website performance
Most websites can use some improvement in performance.
Using the tools available, you may find all kinds of issues
that you never would have thought of or realized were
slowing down your site. The thing is you don’t need to fix
everything all at once.
Use all the online tools you can to identify issues. Work on
one element at a time, then test your site again and see if
there is an improvement. Sometimes you may find that a
change decreases your performance, so just roll back that
change and go on to the next possible issue

Key Takeaways
Don’t overload your site. Fewer items being served tends
to lead to a better performing site, especially on mobile.
Right-size your media – make sure you’re using proper
dimensions and resolution for web display to help load
the site faster.
Make sure your site is mobile responsive. Your website
must be usable across multiple media and screen sizes.
Use all the online tools you can to identify issues that
you may be able to fix.

You might not be able to fix all the beginning but you may
be able to identify one or two to improve your rankings.
When you’re reviewing your site, don’t just ask – do I like the
look and feel of the site, you should be asking – Will the site
help the customer acquisition and customer retention?
Making sure your site high performing will do just that.

26

CHAPTER 4

Web Design Trends
You Need to Know
Each year, web designers watch out for a set of trends that
surface the internet and use it as inspiration to develop client
websites. Many ideas that have been inspired by these
trends have come to fruition from that point onward and
have even resulted in new trends.
The influence of design on a consumer is usually just a
reflection of the web culture in which citizens have grown
accustomed to. Web design trends are largely directed by
popular ideas and expectations in the design community.
Nevertheless, the design trends do not automatically mean
they are the most effective and most successful designs, but
only that they have been generating enough buzz to be
considered notable. Each designer and design enthusiast is
entitled to his or her own opinion, which may not necessarily
be in accordance with the trends in this post.

27

Web Design Trends You Need to Know

CHAPTER 4

Retina Support - When one talks about retina support, the

The first step would be to create an image sample at double

first thing that comes to people’s minds is high-quality

the standard resolution and then save the standard version

graphics in a device. Because mobile devices and PC

at 50% of the size. The bigger image would then have to be

manufacturers belong to a highly competitive industry,

scaled down to the original resolution.

every single firm is on the lookout for the latest
developments in technology that they offer to the products
that they are offering.
This is why along with responsive design, devices with retina
screens are among the most prioritized for production by
mobile giants such as Apple and Samsung. Retina screens
have double the density when compared to an average
LCD. This means that the number of pixels that can be fitted
in one area is double the capacity of an ordinary LCD
screen. The result is an improved image quality that mobile
device users.
Web designers that are working on websites that would
cater to retina devices need to create two sets of images to
achieve the right image that will look very sharp and crisp
on a retina screen.

Fixed Headers - With fixed headers, site visitors can scroll
down a particular page while still seeing the main header,
which provides navigational support that can send them
back to the homepage or move on to another section
of the site.
By using the CSS fixed position attribute, web designers
can staple the header bar onto any website. Although this
is not exactly a new trend, it is only now that it is becoming
more and more evident among several websites.
What makes fixed headers so popular and appealing to
web designers and clients is because they can be applied
to virtually any website, from social media network sites to
blogs, as well as company websites. There is no limit to the
kind of design and it can be easily paired with the overall
layout of the site.

28

Web Design Trends You Need to Know

CHAPTER 4

Fixed headers are becoming one of the most important

Web designers can choose from a myriad of photos and

parts of a website. It also provides excellent aesthetic

choose one that best represents their client’s company and

appeal, not to mention gives site visitors a more positive

the industry that they belong to. When properly blended into

user experience.

a specific layout, this design strategy can give websites the
upper hand in internet marketing.

Without a fixed header, site visitors who have scrolled down
to the bottom of the page would need to scroll back up or
use a keyboard shortcut to access the main header. Now
they can go back to the homepage without having to go
very far to navigate other parts of the website.

Minimalist Landing Pages
A minimalist landing page usually has simple text and
background that any site visitor would be able to easily
comprehend. The main purpose of a landing page is to
obtain new leads for a client’s product or service.

Photo enthusiasts, as well as photographers, would love and
benefit from this web design trend. There are many
discussions regarding this trend and how it is very much a
great way to capture the attention of site visitors, as big,
high-resolution background images are much nicer to look
at than regular colors or gradients.

Many designers tend to use landing pages that have
more than the necessary design needed to attract
potential buyers. However, the most recent trend in
designing landing pages is more focused now on a
minimalistic style. The goal is now to keep everything
simple and straightforward so that visitors can focus on
the core product.

29

CHAPTER 5

Should I get a
web design agency?
Should you spend more than $10,000 on a leading
web design agency in Phoenix?
Owning a website entails more than a web domain and filling
it with content. It has been said that content is king, but web
design is the crown, scepter, and jewel-encrusted throne.
This means that no matter how compelling your copy and
content is, your website needs a good design
to be more marketable.

30

Importance of
Good Web Design
Web design goes beyond aesthetics — it should display four

Websites with good design take into consideration how visitors

major components that any reputable website should have.

read content; like a book, from top to bottom and left to right.

These are navigation, brand consistency, reading patterns

This means that relevant information must be on the upper left

and SEO, and most importantly, building trust.

column and the first thing visitors see.

Navigation is the most critical component of a website,

This practice also helps with SEO efforts, because search

especially for those with many pages. Good web design

engines can crawl your website more efficiently, thus

makes it easy for users to navigate through the site, striking

increasing your placement in search results pages. This

a balance between elements that are pleasing to the eyes

translates to increased visibility and traffic to your site.

and buttons that are functional.
Finally, building trust among customers is very important, so it
Customers must recognize your brand in all forms of

makes sense that your design incorporates elements that

communication. This is what brand consistency is about,

resonate well with your target market. This means making your

and is something that must be present in a well-designed

website look welcoming and professional, and easy to use.

website. Everything that appears in print materials — that is,
brand messaging and imagery — must be carried over into

A website with a professional, uncluttered design makes it

the website design. This needs custom design work,

easier for visitors to read and understand the message you

so templates are not advisable.

are trying to send.

31

Why You Should Invest in a
Reputable Web Design Agency
You should never cut corners in building your website,

They are also trained to be both creative and technically

especially when it comes to design. Hiring professionals to

proficient, so they can execute your vision seamlessly into the

design your website is pricier than relying on templates

site. These professionals are aware that your time is valuable,

available online or doing it yourself, but the benefits far

and since they are experts at what they do, they will be able to

outweigh the cost.

turn in deliverables promptly. After all, they no longer need to
learn or struggle with what they’re supposed to do.

Web design is an investment – one that might cost 10k
upwards. That’s a lot of money, but here are some of the

Furthermore, they put a valuable human touch to your website

reasons why you should hire a professional web design agency

in that they understand how websites are supposed to work and

such as PrimeView:

how people navigate through websites, so they understand the
merits of, say, having your contact details on the upper right

1. We have the skills and experience
needed to deliver results.
Professional web designers are experts in designing sites that
will attract visitors and are adept at SEO techniques, as well as

side of your site at all times, and why large chunks of text must
be broken apart with images.
At PrimeView, we know how to design a website that is easy to
navigate through and people will want to keep coming back to.

in all the software necessary to come up with good web design.

32

Why You Should Invest in a Reputable Web Design Agency
2. We can maintain your site.
One of the main advantages of getting your site designed by a
professional web design agency is that they can help you develop
your website as your business and your customers’ needs grow.
At PrimeView, we have professional web designers that can help
update your site’s design, navigation, and functionality as needed.
This will resonate well with your audience because this means that
you are in tune with their needs.

3. We make your site responsive.
Some of your users might be using an older browser version, or a
device that does not support some aspects of your site (such as
Java or Flash), and professional web designers will ensure that all
elements will be perfect regardless of the browser version or
device your site is being viewed from.

4. We execute designs to your
exact specifications.
Templates are cheap but often limiting. When you pay for a
template, you have a ready-made design. All you have to do
is input your information, and you’re done. It’s easy and
convenient but has little regard for SEO, ease of navigation,
and your brand identity — things that matter on a
well-designed website.
At PrimeView, we will work closely with you in executing the
exact design that you have in mind. We will adjust the
background color, font size, font type, buttons, and all other
elements on the site until everything is exactly as you prefer it,
and if there’s something that needs to be tweaked, we will be
able to do so.

The talented web designers at PrimeView will also ensure that your
website loads properly and accurately, with all elements intact,
regardless of the browser size, which means that we will make your
site design mobile-responsive.

33

Why You Should Invest in a Reputable Web Design Agency

5. We take care of even
the smallest details.
Professional web designers are sticklers for details. We won’t stop
until the site borders are even throughout until all the colors are
just right until all the fonts are of the right size, and until all the links
and flash elements are working correctly.
We will make sure that your site has the perfect canary yellow
background you asked for, and that the text is evenly distributed
so that visitor’s eyes won’t glaze over when they read your content.
This is yet another advantage of having professional designers
work on your site as opposed to purchasing a template.

34

Invest in a Good
Web Design Agency Today

www.primeview.com

Hiring a professional web design agency can get expensive,
but the investment will be worth every penny. PrimeView is
Arizona’s leading web design firm with over 23 years of
experience in the business. Contact us at 480-800-4688
if you need professional web design services in Phoenix.

